# LMB_wRC

Saying that a double is worth more than a single, and hitting a home run is better than hitting a single is one of the most intuitive statement in baseball. But let's say that we wanted to measure HOW much is every outcome of a plate appearance worth, how would we do it? and what is the value that we are using to compare their worth? This questions are the foundations of advanced stats like wOBA, wRAA, wRC+ and oWAR, that aim to evaluate the player based on the value that contribute to run scoring of the team.

Now, in order to calculate this values, we must answer the questions previously posed. The last question is easy to answer, since baseball is a run scoring game we want to know how many runs is every event worth. But now, how can we calculate every event's value? Normaly and ideally what we would do is create an RE24 matrix, which gives us the run expectancy of every possible situation in a baseball regarding runners on the bags and the outs in the inning. After that, we would calculate how much impact each event has in changing the run expectancy value. That way we can evaluate a player and their hitting abilities based on the effect they have on the run expectancy based on their run scoring enviroment.

This is in an ideal world, however in the LMB (Liga Mexicana de Beisbol) or the mexican summer league, not all the data is available to build an RE24 matrix. So some might say that this is the end of the road then. Because we need the matrix to put on the weights of each event to then calculate this advanced stats. However, there is a way of calculating this information. According to the Buckeye and Sabermetrics we can simulate any run enviroment with the base runs formula. I'm not going to dive to deep on the calculations performed, but to sum it up, basicaly with our base run equation we can use the "+1 method" that consists of adding one to all the events individually, and see how many runs the base run equation changes. After some mathematical calculations we can determine the Linear weights of each event. This weights are then used to calculate our advanced stats. After doing this calculations considering the events of the 2024 season of LMB we get the weights of each event based on the running enviroment of the mexican summer league. For more information on this method please visit Buckeyes and Sabermetris [article](https://gosu02.tripod.com/id108.html).

Once we have this weigths we are able to calculate our first stat, wOBA. wOBA aims to provide the same level of detail that OPS provides. OPS is the sum of OBP and SLG, however OPS gives the same weight to all events and values both OBP and SLG on the same level when in reality OBP is worth al most as twice as OBP. In order to solve this, wOBA uses the weight of each event in regards to how much it contributes to a team offensive based on how many runs it is worth to give the proper value to each outcome of a plate appearance. In order to make wOBA easier to interpret we need to scale it to look like OBP. To do this we calculate the "wOBA scale" which consists in summing all the event multiplied by their weights and divide it by the sum of plate appearances, we can call this number X. After that we calculate the leagues OBP and divide it by X. Now have our wOBA scale to get the weight that are going to be used in our wOBA equation we then need to multiply every weight by the wOBA scale, then we can proceed to calculate wOBA using this weights. This process is explained in more detail in [here](https://library.fangraphs.com/the-beginners-guide-to-deriving-woba/). Here is the line of code that was used to calculate each player's wOBA:

